Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today,
is the start of yet another
three-part mini-series.
This one is on the topic of World War I.
But we aren’t really going to
talk all that much about World
War I, at least not directly.
Instead, we are going to explore
this period through the lives of
unusual characters involved in the
war, some more directly than others.
So, in today’s episode, part one, we
are going to talk about the amazing
story of T.E. Lawrence, the British
archaeologist and army officer who
fought alongside Arabian tribesmen
for a united Arab nation, all
while harbouring a guilty secret.
Next up, in part two, we’ll learn about
the story of Mata Hari, the Dutch woman
who became an exotic dancer and the talk
of Paris, before being executed by a
firing squad on the charge of being a spy.
And in part three, in the interests
of balance, we will talk about Manfred
von Richthofen, a German aircraft
pilot so deadly he was known to his
enemies as “The Red Baron”. OK then,
let’s get right into it and learn about
the unlikely life of T.E. Lawrence.
A title you will often find in lists
of “The Greatest Films Ever Made” is
the 1962 classic “Lawrence of Arabia”.
The trailer for the film opens with
wide-angle shots of a man trekking
through a vast desert on a camel.
As the camel obediently plods forward,
putting one foot in front of the
other in the scorching desert sand,
you hear the words of the narrator,
ostensibly about the man on the camel.
He says, “I deem him one of the
greatest beings alive in our time.
His name will live in history. It
will live in the annals of war…it
will live in the legends of Arabia.”
The quote is attributed
to Winston Churchill.
Immediately, the viewer is hooked.
If Churchill, the great wartime
leader, is calling this man “one of
the greatest beings alive in our time”,
well, that certainly is something.
The trailer continues, with the
narrator going on to say that “no man
of our time has drawn upon himself so
much praise and so much criticism”.
It is a fair assessment, but
now we must move from talking
about the movie to the real man.
Thomas Edward Lawrence was born in 1888
in north Wales, the second of five sons.
He was a shy but passionate boy.
When he set his mind to
something, he did it.
And from an early age he was
passionate about history.
When he was 15, he spent the summer
cycling around a large area of southern
England with a friend, visiting
every single church he came across.
The boys took notes, made rubbings
of brass memorials, and when they had
finished, they presented their findings
to the Ashmolean Museum in Oxford.
As you might imagine, the museum’s
curators were astounded and impressed
by the boys’ attention to detail.
And this wasn’t a one-off.
The teenage boy had got the bug, he
had had a small taste of adventure.
Later that summer, he cycled
around France on his own, visiting
medieval castles and taking notes.
Then he did the same thing again the
following summer, still aged only 16.
This clear passion for understanding
the past earned him a place at Oxford
University, where he read history, and
for his thesis, he went one step further.
In his last year at university, and aged
only 20, he embarked on a three-month
trip to Syria to study castles of the
crusader era, so medieval castles.
Now, even putting aside the more recent
political instability in the region,
even in the 21st century, Syria is
not the easiest country to get around.
But Lawrence visited in 1909,
and he was going from abandoned
castle to abandoned castle.
There was practically no
infrastructure, no way of getting
from one castle to the next.
So…he mostly walked and rode on
donkeys, claiming to have travelled
a grand total of 1,600 kilometres.
He had already developed a keen
interest in the Middle East, but this
trip really took it to a new level.
And this area, I should add, was
still part of the Ottoman Empire.
There was no Syria, no Lebanon,
no Jordan, this was all part of
the sprawling Ottoman Empire.
And this will be of vital
importance to the rest of our story.
So, in 1910, at the age of 22, Thomas
Lawrence graduated, and like any fresh
graduate, he was in the market for a job.
Clearly not any job, though.
It would have to involve some
form of exploring the past,
preferably in the Middle East.
And sure enough, he did not become
a lawyer or an accountant; he
found a job as an archaeologist.
He worked across the Middle
East, in modern-day Lebanon,
Syria, Israel and Egypt.
And he seemed different from
most of the other Western
archaeologists exploring the area.
He studied Arabic, and spoke
it practically fluently.
He was actually interested in the language
and culture of the people living there,
whereas most of his fellow archaeologists
believed they were there to teach;
there was nothing they could learn
from these backwards “desert people”.
Now, fast forward to 1914.
The assassination of Archduke Franz
Ferdinand of Austria, in the now
Bosnian capital of Sarajevo, had
ripple effects that extended all
the way to the Arabian desert.
As you may know, or remember from
our last mini-series on the theme
of the fall of the Ottoman Empire,
the Ottomans sided with Germany.
Suddenly, this vast swathe of territory
in the Middle East was the enemy.
Lawrence was sent to Egypt, which was
under the rule of the British at the
time, where he was tasked with making
sense of what was going on in the region.
He was, in many ways, the
perfect man for the job.
He spoke Arabic, he understood
local customs and traditions, and
he felt more at home in the Middle
East than he did back in England.
But at this stage, Lawrence
was not yet a hero, not yet the
legendary “Lawrence of Arabia.”
He was simply a junior intelligence
officer, working behind the scenes in
Cairo, reading reports, interrogating
prisoners, and trying to make
sense of the complex tribal and
political landscape of the region.
And it was complex.
The Ottoman Empire ruled over the Middle
East, but its control was not absolute.
In the deserts of Arabia, tribal leaders
held enormous power, often ruling
over their lands with little direct
interference from Constantinople.
The British, who were desperate to weaken
the Ottoman position, saw an opportunity:
if they could convince the Arab tribes
to rise up against their Ottoman rulers,
it would divide the enemy’s forces
and stretch their resources thin.
The man at the centre of this idea was
Sharif Hussein of Mecca, the ruler of
the Hejaz, a region that included the two
holiest cities in Islam—Mecca and Medina.
Hussein had grown increasingly wary
of Ottoman rule and had ambitions of
establishing an independent Arab kingdom.
And the British promised him
exactly that, if he could
overthrow the Ottomans, that was.
In 1915, there was a series of
letters exchanged between Sharif
Hussein and the British High
Commissioner in Egypt, Henry McMahon.
In these letters, McMahon seemed to
confirm that if the Arabs helped to
overthrow the Ottomans, they would be
granted their own independent state.
And so, it began.
In 1916, Hussein’s forces, led in large
part by his son Prince Faisal, launched
attacks against Ottoman garrisons.
But it was not a smooth campaign.
The Arab forces were desert warriors,
skilled at a certain type of warfare,
where horses and swords were involved,
but they were bitterly unprepared for a
war fought by machine guns and artillery.
What’s more, they lacked unity.
Many tribes were reluctant to join
the revolt, suspicious of British
intentions or unwilling to commit
without clear guarantees of victory.
This was where Lawrence
entered the picture.
By this point, he had itchy
feet from sitting at his
relatively cushy Cairo desk job.
Two of his younger brothers had been
killed in the bloody battlefields
of northern France, and he felt
a deep sense of guilt that he
hadn’t really done anything.
He was ready, and he jumped at the
opportunity to get closer to the action.
He was sent from Cairo to meet Prince
Faisal in person, to assess the
situation and determine how Britain
could best support the Arab fighters.
What he found was a movement
that was full of ambition but
lacking a defined strategy.
The Arab forces had the advantage of
mobility, knowledge of the terrain,
and motivation, but they lacked
the heavy weaponry, discipline,
and resources of the Ottoman army.
Lawrence believed the Arabs
needed a new way of fighting.
They could not win a conventional
war against the Ottomans.
They didn’t have the
numbers or the weapons.
Instead, they needed to wage
guerrilla warfare—hit-and-run attacks,
sabotage and psychological pressure.
Rather than trying to hold and defend
territory, they would move like the
desert itself, appearing suddenly,
striking hard, and disappearing
before the enemy could retaliate.
Faisal listened.
He seemed to understand that
Lawrence, unlike most of his fellow
British officers, was not trying
to command the Arabs but rather
to advise them in their own fight.
A strange friendship developed between
the British officer and the Arab
prince—two men from entirely different
worlds, but seemingly united by a
shared vision of Arab independence.
Lawrence abandoned his British
uniform, and instead dressed in flowing
white robes like an Arab sheikh.
It was partly practicality—the
robes were more suited to the
desert—but it was also a symbol.
He was not just an outsider
observing the revolt.
He was part of it.
He fought alongside the Arab soldiers, not
just hanging back sipping tea and advising
the prince, but on the frontlines,
leading guerilla missions, setting off
explosives, and getting involved in a
far more active way than he was meant to.
Remember, he had been sent to be
an informal advisor to the prince;
he hadn’t been sent to fight.
And although he wasn’t a soldier
by training, he seemed to have a
natural sense of military strategy.
Perhaps the most famous
example of this was with Aqaba.
The port of Aqaba, on the Red Sea,
was a vital Ottoman stronghold.
It was heavily defended from
the sea, where the Ottomans
expected any attack to come.
But Lawrence had a different plan.
Instead of attacking from the
water, he proposed an impossible
route—crossing the deadly Nefud Desert
and attacking Aqaba from behind.
The journey was brutal.
Lawrence, Faisal’s fighters, and
the fearsome Bedouin cavalry, led
by a fierce warrior named Auda abu
Tayi, crossed nearly 1000 kilometres
of some of the harshest terrain
on Earth, suffering from thirst,
exhaustion, and the relentless heat.
When they finally reached Aqaba in July of
1917, coming from the desert in the north
rather than by sea in the south, they
took the Ottoman defenders by surprise.
The garrison collapsed.
Some defenders fled into the sea in panic.
It was a stunning victory.
Aqaba was a turning point.
It gave the Arab forces a port for
supplies, a symbolic victory, and
credibility on the world stage.
Lawrence rode for days through
the desert to deliver the news
to British commanders in Cairo.
He arrived, sunburned, half-starved,
and covered in dust, but triumphant.
However, the war was not over.
After Aqaba, Lawrence and the Arab
forces turned their focus to the
Hejaz Railway, which was the lifeline
of the Ottoman forces in the region.
Instead of trying to capture
cities, they attacked the railway
itself, derailing trains, blowing
up bridges, and planting mines.
It was a war of sabotage.
The Ottomans could never be sure
where the next attack would come.
And it was during one of these
missions that Lawrence experienced
the darkest moment of his life.
In late 1917, he traveled in
disguise to the town of Deraa, deep
in Ottoman-controlled territory.
He was dressed as an Arab and attempting
to gather intelligence when he was
captured by Ottoman forces and brought
before the local governor, Hajim Bey.
In his own account, Lawrence wrote
that he was beaten, tortured, and
sexually assaulted by his captors.
He was eventually released,
most probably because he never
revealed his true identity.
Had he done so, and had he been
unmasked as the notorious “El Aurens,”
as the Arabs called him, he would
almost certainly have been shot.
Now, this makes for a great story, and
it is a particularly good part of the
movie, but its truth is somewhat debated.
The only account of it comes from Lawrence
himself, and he was prone to exaggeration.
What really happened, if anything,
will most likely never be known.
But what is clear is that something
changed in Lawrence after Deraa.
He became more ruthless in battle.
He authorised brutal reprisals
against Ottoman troops, including
the execution of prisoners.
Some of his Arab allies noticed
the shift—he was no longer
just a strategist and diplomat.
He was a man who had been
broken and rebuilt by war.
By 1918, Arab forces, alongside
the British, reached Damascus.
The Ottomans were in retreat.
Lawrence rode into the city
alongside Faisal’s men.
It was supposed to be the
moment of Arab independence.
It was not.
While Lawrence had been fighting in the
desert, diplomats in London and Paris had
already divided the Middle East without
any consultation of any of its leaders.
This was a secret deal signed in
1916, the Sykes-Picot Agreement,
in which the British and the French
carved up the region after the
inevitable fall of the Ottoman Empire.
The French would take Syria and
Lebanon, while Britain would
control Iraq, Jordan, and Palestine.
Arab independence was
never part of the deal.
Now, here’s where it gets a little
more complicated for T.E. Lawrence,
the supposed flag carrier and chief
proponent of an Arab liberation movement.
Lawrence knew about the
Sykes-Picot Agreement.
It’s not clear exactly how much
he knew, perhaps not all the
details, but it's highly likely
that he knew of its existence.
While apparently promising Prince
Faisal one thing, and earning his
deep trust and respect, he knew that
politicians back in London and Paris had
no plans of honouring this agreement.
The promises in the exchange of letters
had been kept deliberately vague on the
part of the British, giving the Arabs
the idea that they were firm promises
but leaving room for the British to hold
up their hands later on and say “oh no,
no, that’s not at all what we meant”.
The Arabs were to be used, plain and
simple, and once they had done their
job and caused enough disruption to
the Ottomans, they would be discarded.
Now, although Lawrence knew about this,
it seems that he had tried to ignore it.
Perhaps he hoped that by the time
the war ended, and it was clear how
important this Arab revolt had been,
Britain would have no choice but to
honour its promises to the Arabs.
But things did not turn out that way.
When Damascus fell, Faisal was
declared king of Syria—but the
French soon removed him by force.
The Arab kingdom Lawrence had fought
for vanished almost immediately.
He was devastated.
He returned to Britain a broken man.
He refused a knighthood, turned down
honours, and withdrew from public life.
He changed his name, enlisted in the
Royal Air Force under a false identity,
and lived the rest of his life in
a self-imposed exile in a 60-metre
square cottage in the countryside.
In 1935, at the age of 46, he
died in a motorcycle accident.
Some say he was running from the past,
from the weight of broken promises.
Others see him as a tragic figure,
a man who tried to shape history
but was ultimately powerless against
the forces of empire and diplomacy.
And the Middle East he left
behind, to state the obvious, was
not the one he had envisioned.
The borders drawn by Sykes and
Picot still shape the region today.
The struggle for Arab independence
continued for decades, and resentment
towards Western involvement never faded.
To this day, T.E. Lawrence is
remembered in different ways.
In Britain, to most he is a romantic
figure, a daring adventurer.
In the Arab world, he is a more
ambiguous symbol—to some, a hero
who fought for Arab independence; to
others, a man who, knowingly or not,
played a role in one of the greatest
betrayals of the modern Middle East.
He is nothing if not impressive, and
to end this episode, I will leave
you with a quote from the man which I
think sums up his sense of adventure.
“All men dream: but not equally.
Those who dream by night in the dusty
recesses of their minds wake up in
the day to find it was vanity, but
the dreamers of the day are dangerous
men, for they may act their dreams
with open eyes, to make it possible.”
OK then, that is it for today's
episode on T.E. Lawrence, otherwise
known as Lawrence of Arabia.
I hope it's been an interesting one,
and that you've learnt something new.
As always, I would love to know
what you thought about this episode.
We have lots of listeners from all
over the Middle East, so tell me, what
do you know and think about this man?
Hero, villain, or somewhere in the middle?
I would love to know, so if you’re
listening to this somewhere you can
leave a comment, like Spotify or YouTube,
then now’s the time to get doing that.
Or for the members among you, you can head
right into our community forum, which is
at community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.